following up on our clock for clock 3100
versus 3300x benchmarks
we wanted to see if it's possible to
make the 3100
equate the 3300x with a little bit of
extra help
so for this one we're doing some
infinity fabric overclocking and
we also changed up the memory this is
getting into sort of
personal curiosities and academic
research at this point because
realistically you shouldn't be trying to
save 20
off the cpu difference by spending a
whole lot more on the memory instead
but we're going to test it to see what
happens if you did do that
and we also have the infinity fabric
only clocks
separately so we can isolate the memory
versus the if changes
and see if it's possible to get the 3100
up to the 3300x and amd's new ryzen cpu
line before that this video is brought
to you by cd projekt
red and the cyberpunk 2077 pc modding
contest
the cyberpunk 2077 team is hosting a
case modding contest that gives winners
the opportunity to work with
professional case modders to build the
ultimate system you don't have to do any
physical modding to enter the contest
just a mock-up with three views of the
mod
the theme is the future is recyclable
and it should be inspired by cyberpunk
which has countless sources of influence
for the work
the contest ends on may 17th and
cyberpunk's team will select five
winners to partner with pro case modders
to make it a reality
use any tools you want to make the
mock-up of a cyberpunk-themed build
featuring e-waste or recycled materials
and then submit images to the team
learn more and enter the contest using
the link in the description below
or go to cyberpunk.net cyberup this is
following up on our r3 3100 and 3300x
reviews
set at the same clocks we used 4.4
gigahertz and we changed nothing else
so they kept exactly the same memory
same timings
same frequency everything same infinity
fabric
the only change was in all core oc that
brought them up to 4 4.
and the end result was that there was
actually a pretty substantial
difference between the two and that
difference is
thanks to the four plus zero core
configuration on a single ccx
as opposed to a two plus two core
configuration
on uh two ccx's for the 3100
so splitting them apart like that adds
some latency
where you have ccx to ccx latency
there's also an additional interesting
point of consideration where now you're
splitting the cache too
so you no longer do you have all the
cash on a single ccx
you have it across both of them so now
if you have cores working in ccx
one and they need to get something out
of cash and ccx2
there's going to be an additional
latency hit and that's the penalty that
we're trying to see if we can
overcome by overclocking some other
things in the system to see really how
much does that latency impact matter and
just for those who did miss the reviews
to really recap the most important point
what we were trying to point out is that
it's not like the 3600
and 3600 x where you're paying 50 for a
letter that effectively means nothing
it's actually configured differently on
a silicon level
so you can't just buy the 3100 clock it
up and save 20 bucks doesn't work that
way this time
all right so what we did the simplest
answer to
do something other than core is to raise
infinity fabric we have a whole separate
piece
on infinity fabric and memory
overclocking tuning all kinds of timing
benchmarks
it was really in depth with a whole
bunch of different memory kits
and we did that last year with the ryzen
3000 series launch
that those numbers that scaling that
hasn't changed so you can check that
content out we'll try to remember to
link it below if you want to learn more
about that
but we're taking those concepts and
bringing them forward to this content
and the first thing we did was keep the
4 4 gigahertz cpu overclock from the
review unchanged
and we added an 1866 megahertz infinity
fabric overclock we couldn't get it
higher than that that seems to be out
where these
stop being stable if you went to ln2 you
have the additional challenge of having
to bring down the infinity fabric to
something like 1467
because uh there's an issue with cold
where once you go past it's different
every chip but something like minus 90
minus 80 you can't get down to minus 150
without dropping
if so that's a significant challenge
that will present itself when we do
eventually go to ln2
but moving on from that we the
difference there was going up from 1600
megahertz to 1866
m clock and du clock were left unchanged
at one to one
and then 1600 megahertz this doesn't
require much explanation we
basically just boosted one number here
however we know from our ryzen 3000
memory overclocking piece that even
better performance can be achieved by
increasing f clock
m clock and u clock in lockstep as well
as optimizing memory timings
this memory overclocking piece is still
valid and still accurate to scaling
so again that'll be linked if you want
more info we're not going to go as deep
into it in this piece
ryzen dram calculator is a well-known
and accepted tool for memory tuning on
ryzen at this point so
using 1.7.0 we calculated ideal settings
for
our two sticks of eight gigabyte 3866
megahertz g-skill trident z memory we
used the same gigabyte x570 master board
that we used in the cpu review
previously so we'll be able to compare
our results to the previously logged
results
although we've found that the msi x570
godlike is superior for memory
overclocking in general
the 4.4 gigahertz cpu overclock we
tested in the review was left in place
with an unnecessarily high but still
thermally safe on our bench vcore set
to ensure no instability from that
change during original testing our 3100
was stable with a set voltage of 1.343
volts
and could perhaps have gone even lower
we found that setting the memory to
38.66 megahertz was forcing us into two
to one mode whether we wanted it or not
so retaining these same settings we down
clocked to 36 66 megahertz
ddr and successfully booted with a one
to one to one
which is the most important part for
ryzen overclocking in this
aspect 1833 speed for infinity fabric
memory clock and memory controller clock
that should give us the best results
within reason andy's latest ryzen master
guide says that
quote above a memory clock of 1866
megahertz turning coupled mode off
and setting fabric clock to half the
memory clock will likely be necessary
for further memory timing parameter
optimization
toward system stability hence our chosen
clock speed below 1866.
we managed at 1900 one to one to one in
the original ryzen 3000 memory oc guide
but that was a different cpu
different motherboard and mileage may
vary okay enough explaining the testing
we'll get into the
actual benchmarks now and another final
note here
that we're trying to look at can the
3100 meet the 3300x so we're going to
focus on some of the games and scenarios
where
the gap was wider we have a couple in
there where it's smaller like
civilization 6
just for perspective but the focus here
is going to be on
those uh wider gap games
and finally the 3300x is obviously just
as capable of doing all these things as
the 3100
so we have those numbers in a couple of
the games but not all of them
the focus again is on the 3100 let's get
started with the gaming benchmarks f1
2019 is up first this one does an
excellent job of highlighting
differences between cpus in general but
the high fps averages can make
differences seem more dramatic than they
actually are 200 fps average for the 4.4
gigahertz 3100 versus 239 fps average
for the 4.4 gigahertz
3300x is a big difference but it's
still a 19.3 uplift so not quite as
dramatic as with the three kingdoms
campaign benchmark
unlike three kingdoms f-119 proved at
least somewhat responsive to our tuning
with a 2.9 percent uplift from a plane
f-clock increase
going from 200 fps average to 206 and a
4.7 percent increase
from the full suite of tuning and clock
adjustments up to 209 fps average
that reduces the 3300 x's lead to 14
but frankly speaking that's still a
massive difference
for two amd cpus that are nominally
running at the same speed
the 3300x remains the better buy
especially since we ran the 3300x with
the 3200 megahertz standardized memory
test kit that we use on all platforms
you'd be better off spending the 20 more
on the cpu
and then less money on memory even
running its stock
the tune on the 3300x didn't change the
results too much
especially given f1's higher fps and
therefore higher volatility in the finer
details the campaign benchmark for total
war 3 kingdoms tells a similar story
with the 3300x scoring a 25.2
advantage at 124fps average and that's
when overclocked versus the overclocked
at 99.4 fps average there's only a small
2.1
boost over the original overclocked
result for the 3100 resulting from the
memory tuning and that's at 102 fps
average
this is one of the titles with the most
dramatic differences between the two r3s
and one where we most expected to see
infinity fabric overclocking
and the memory tune have more of an
effect but a factor other than playing
clock speeds is at work here the 3300x
with 3666 memory
and one to one to one mode scored within
test variants of the 4.4 gigahertz
all-core result
both at around 124 fps average total
wars battle benchmark is next the
overclocked r3 3300x scored an
especially high 13.9 percent higher than
the overclocked 3100 in total war 3
kingdoms battle benchmark at 1080p
but neither raising f clock nor tuning
memory with f
clock m clock and u clock all increased
caused the results to stray
significantly from 1 13 fps average
the results were within test to test
variants of the 4.4 gigahertz all-core
overclock without any tuning
these are within error and we can't
measure any difference outside of test
variants so they're functionally the
same in this particular benchmark the
division 2 chart still has slightly
fewer cpus on it than the rest as we
catch up following our decision to
switch to medium settings
but all the r3 tests were run through
this benchmark
the overclocked r33300x had a now
typical advantage of 14.8
over the overclocked 3100 at 1080p
that's with both at 4.4 gigahertz all
core
raising f clock gave minor uplift to 164
fps average on the 3100
and the full set of tunings and
overclocks raised performance 2 percent
versus the plain all-core overclock
again the 3300x maintains a solid lead
even as we attempt to counter the
disadvantages of the 3100
the gap is now 12.5 percent instead of
14.8 percent
and that's with the 3300x still on 3200
megahertz memory
for our standard reviews so still a
plenty wide gap
it may again just be better to buy the
3300 x shadow of the tomb raider at
1080p is next and it lines up closely
with the results we've seen so far
the original 3300x overclock had a 15.4
percent lead over the 3100s overclock
of a 121 fps average for the results
raising f clock had no significant
impact and was within variance and
memory tuning in combination with the
overclock
raised performance 4.1 percent over the
all-core only oc
the typical pattern we've seen is that
the 3300x outperforms the 3100
at the same static multiplier raising f
clock alone has little to no effect on
this
and running faster memory while
simultaneously raising f clock and u
clock
offers a minor performance advantage but
still doesn't put the 3100 at the same
level as the 3300x the 3300x is
equally capable of running faster memory
and clocks and it benefited at 141 fps
average from 139.7
previously so even that small bump for
the 3100 doesn't mean that much
not that it means much for the 3300x
either of course hitman 2 is one of
those several tests where the
overclocked 3100 couldn't beat the stock
3300x
at 103 fps average versus 114 fps
average the 3300x obviously maintains a
lead
simply raising f clock caused no
measurable change in the overall average
but raising the memory speed as well did
cause a 3.5 percent
uplift versus the original overclocked
result that's not exactly mind-blowing
and the fact that the f-clock increase
alone didn't help
is a good indicator that the memory
tuning is more responsible for the
improvement
and also potentially more expensive of a
jump than just the 3300x with the same
memory
the 3300x remains solidly ahead here our
civ6 turntime benchmark is next
looking at the time and seconds required
to complete the average turn for an ai
player
the r3 3100 decreased time required from
40.3 seconds to 38.3
which is a meaningful difference in this
highly accurate and consistent bench
so we saw a reduction of five percent
time required the f clock oc and memoc
results move to about 38
and 38.2 seconds so not a huge change
the 3300x remains at 35.3 seconds
for both of its oc results memory
timings also play a role here for the
simpler f clock overclock
where the cl 14 3200 result is plotting
marginally better than the cl16 3666
result
this chart is for red dead redemption 2
with dx12 and 1080p high
we may increasingly move away from high
settings in red dead 2 as a cpu
benchmark in the future
because of the obvious gpu limitations
but for now the 3300x and 3100 are at
least measurably below the performance
level
of the 3600 and therefore not hitting a
gpu limitation at 1080p
the core overclocks on the 3100 and
3300x had barely any effect on either
chip in this test
and the 4.4 gigahertz 3300x had a 10
advantage
over the 4.4 gigahertz 3100 tuning the
memory
with a one to one to one 1833 megahertz
configuration raised the average fps
from 100
to 102 for the 3100 while just raising
the f clock
to 1866 with our original kit of memory
did just as well within margin of error
achieving 103 fps average
that reduces the overclocked 3300 x's
advantage to 6.6 percent
but it's still obviously in the lead
note that there's again potential for a
memory timing impact to play
more of a role than just the frequency
but we don't have the test resolution to
actually see a measurable difference
between 109.8
and 109.5 medium settings create more of
a cpu bottleneck for red dead using the
dx12 api but since the game is fairly
cpu limited by the r3s even at high
settings
oc versus oc the 3300x only has a
slightly higher 11.2 percent advantage
here the result with tuned memory
is again slightly higher than the
results with a simple f clock increase
in this test
more in line with what we'd expect than
the high results at 106 fps average the
tuned result is a 4.1
improvement over the plane oc for all
core
and reduces the 3300 x's oc versus oc
advantage
to 6.8 percent red dead 2 with vulcan
and these settings is pretty useless as
a cpu benchmark but it shows exactly why
we avoid bottlenecks and cpu reviews
they don't teach us anything about the
cpu because obviously a 9900k
isn't equal to a 7700k or that close to
a 3300x
vulcan is the default api though for red
dead 2 so we'll cover the results with
it as well
the 3300x is 9.2 percent ahead of the
3100 and oc versus oc performance
at 4.4 gigahertz only no other tunes and
although a plane f clock increase had no
impact on the average
tuning memory as well raised performance
for the 3100
oc by 3.8 percent up to 117 fps average
and reduced the overclocked 3300x's lead
to 5.8 percent
these are the same results as with dx12
but with smaller margins due to the
greater gpu limitations grand theft auto
at 1080p has all of the r3s relatively
close together in performance
with a range from 89 fps average for the
stock 3100 to 105 fps howard for the
overclocked 3300x
within that limited range the cpus stack
up as they have in the other tests
the 3300 x 4.4 gigahertz is 8.3
ahead of the 3100 at 105 fps average to
97 fps average
with both overclocked raising the f
clock alone had no significant impact
and the comprehensive tuning and
overclocking
raised performance by 1.8 versus the
straight 4.4 gigahertz all-core
overclock
failing still to bring it to the 3300
x's level of performance
stock or otherwise 7-zip is up next we
didn't bother running the full suite of
enterprise tests with
just an f-clock increase since it had
been fairly well established that the
tuned memory was giving us more of a
performance advantage
that didn't hold true for 7-zip where
the decompress score
was effectively identical to the
original overclocked 3100 result
there's almost no difference in any of
the results here outside of the stock
3100 cpu
so this task just doesn't seem to care
photoshop didn't take well to our memory
tuning
although the original 3300x overclock
had a 10.1 percent advantage over the
3100s overclock an overall score
the result with the faster memory and
tuning was a couple percent lower
that's probably because the cl-14
timings at 3200
are helping more than the 3600 cl 16
configuration
so we've hit diminishing returns on
frequency the memory changes caused
minor performance uplifts in our render
benchmarks like v-ray premiere and
blender so we'll use blender as a
summary of those results
the 3300 xoc originally rendered our
monkey head render scene
in 2.7 faster time than the 3100 oc
at 25.4 minutes versus 26.1 minutes
but with the memory change it was just
under two percent faster
the logo render finished in 31.4 minutes
on the 4.4 gigahertz 3300x and 32.1
minutes
on the 4.4 gigahertz 3100 making the
3300x 2.2
faster with memory tuning and clock
increases the 3100 finished in 31.8
minutes
making the 3300x a little over one
percent faster
these results are roughly representative
of those other benchmarks as well
although the exact numbers are different
the overclocks aren't hugely different
in performance to begin with although
the performance deficit on the 3100 is
largely due to splitting the cores
across different ccx's
as opposed to the 3300x this deficit
isn't as easy to make up as just simply
cranking the infinity fabric as high as
it can go
and even doing different memory leaving
the 3300x on
3200 megahertz memory although still
with cl 14
that didn't really help in this scenario
either it gets it closer
but we were unable to equate 3300x
performance
with the 3100 and all of that additional
tuning so this is our
best effort at looking into this without
going too ridiculous
obviously you could always do more we
could do liquid nitrogen doesn't really
count
we could also start spending uh in
theory a whole lot more of the
assumed budget on memory and even that
isn't really going to get you there
so the end result here is that it's
better to just spend the extra 20
on the 3300 x than it would be to do all
this other stuff on the 3100
and still have a worse performer overall
part of the issue here again
might be the separation of the cache as
well where you're splitting it into
groups of eight megabytes l3 instead of
16 on the single
ccx for the 3300x so artificial product
segmentation or not
the end result here is that finally
there's an instance where the lower end
of the ryzen cpus
with the same core count configuration
is unable to just be overclocked to
match
its higher end counterpart with an x at
the end of it and
so in that regard we think that the 3100
is probably going to be more like the
and the 1300x relationship in the
original ryzen launch where
one of them is just forgotten and it's
because they're
they're close enough in price but not
that close
in some applications and performance not
proportionally you're often paying
less than a dollar per percentage point
gained if you want to look at it that
way
so the 3300 x does just seem like
objectively the better deal
if you can stretch the extra 20 in your
budget if you can't well
the 3100 is fine the 1600 af is a whole
hell of a lot more appealing at 85
and amd is still pushing them the
channel you will still be able to buy
them
where you here is the second
uh second person is is maybe a bit
ambiguous because
uh you might end up actually just being
scalpers you sell it for 150 bucks
instead but if you can grab one it's a
way better deal than a 3100 for sure
there's absolutely no point to buying a
3100 if you can get a 1600 af
before it's actually intended msrp so
anyway uh yeah 3300x looks pretty good
here the gap can't be just magically
erased with additional overclocking
uh at least not without getting into
levels that aren't realistic anymore
so that's it for this one thanks for
watching subscribe for more go to
store.cameratexas.net
or patreon.comgamers to help us out
directly with stuff like this
it's a significant help and allows us to
reduce our reliance on advertisers so
thank you for your support there
and we'll see you all next time
[Music]
so